doc/cprover-manual/contracts-functions.md, before:

# Function Contracts

CBMC offers support for function contracts, which includes three basic clauses:
_requires_, _ensures_, and _assigns_.
These clauses formally describe the specification of a function.
CBMC also provides a series of built-in constructs to be used with functions
contracts (e.g., _history variables_, _quantifiers_, and _memory predicates_).

## Overview

Take a look at the example below.

```c
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdint.h>

#define SUCCESS 0
#define FAILURE -1

int sum(const uint32_t a, const uint32_t b, uint32_t* out)
{
  const uint64_t result = ((uint64_t) a) + ((uint64_t) b);
  if (result > UINT32_MAX) return FAILURE;
  *out = (uint32_t) result;
  return SUCCESS;
}

int foo()
{
  uint32_t a;
  uint32_t b;
  uint32_t out;
  int rval = sum(a, b, &out);
  if (rval == SUCCESS)
    return out;
  return rval;
}
```

Function `sum` writes the sum of `a` and `b` to `out`, and returns `SUCCESS`;
unless the result of the addition is too large to be represented as an `uint32_t`, in which case it returns `FAILURE`. Let's write
a function contract for this function.

A function contract has three parts:

- **Precondition** - describes what the function requires of the arguments
  supplied by the caller and of global variables;
- **Postcondition** - describes the effect of the function;
- **Write Set** - describes the set of locations outside the function that
  might be written to.

In our example, the developer may require from the caller to properly allocate
all arguments, thus, pointers must be valid. We can specify the preconditions of
a function using `__CPROVER_requires` (see [Requires \& Ensures
Clauses](contracts-requires-and-ensures.md) Section for details) and we can
specify an allocated object using a predicate called `__CPROVER_is_fresh` (see
[Memory Predicate](contracts-memory-predicates.md) Section for details). Thus, for the `sum` function, the set
of preconditions are

```c
/* Precondition */
__CPROVER_requires(__CPROVER_is_fresh(out, sizeof(*out)))
```

We can use `__CPROVER_ensures` to specify postconditions (see [Requires \&
Ensures Clauses](contracts-requires-and-ensures.md) Section for details).  In our
example, developers can use the built-in construct `__CPROVER_return_value`,
which represents the return value of a function. As postconditions, one may list
possible return values (in this case, either `SUCCESS` or `FAILURE`) as well as
describe the main property of this function: if the function returns `SUCCESS`,
then `*out` stores the result of `a + b`.  We can also check that the value in
`*out` will be preserved in case of failure by using `__CPROVER_old`, which
refers to the value of a given object in the pre-state of a function (see
[History Variables](contracts-history-variables.md) Section for details). Thus, for the `sum` function, the
set of postconditions are


```c
/* Postconditions */
__CPROVER_ensures(__CPROVER_return_value == SUCCESS || __CPROVER_return_value == FAILURE)
__CPROVER_ensures((__CPROVER_return_value == SUCCESS) ==> (*out == (a + b)))
__CPROVER_ensures((__CPROVER_return_value == FAILURE) ==> (*out == __CPROVER_old(*out)))
```

Finally, the _assigns_ clause allows developers to define a frame condition (see
[Assigns Clause](contracts-assigns.md) Section for details).
In general, systems for describing the frame condition of a function
use either writes or modifies semantics; this design is based on the former.
This means that memory not specified by the assigns clause must
not be written within the given function scope, even if the value(s) therein are
not modified. In our example, since we expect that only the value that
`out` points to may be modified, we annotate the function using `__CPROVER_assigns(*out)`.

```c
/* Write Set */
__CPROVER_assigns(*out)
```

Here is the whole function with its contract.

```c
int sum(const uint32_t a, const uint32_t b, uint32_t* out)
/* Precondition */
__CPROVER_requires(__CPROVER_is_fresh(out, sizeof(*out)))
/* Postconditions */
__CPROVER_ensures(__CPROVER_return_value == SUCCESS || __CPROVER_return_value == FAILURE)
__CPROVER_ensures((__CPROVER_return_value == SUCCESS) ==> (*out == (a + b)))
__CPROVER_ensures((__CPROVER_return_value == FAILURE) ==> (*out == __CPROVER_old(*out)))
/* Write Set */
__CPROVER_assigns(*out)
{
  const uint64_t result = ((uint64_t) a) + ((uint64_t) b);
  if (result > UINT32_MAX) return FAILURE;
  *out = (uint32_t) result;
  return SUCCESS;
}
```

First, we have to prove that the function satisfies the contract.

```shell
   goto-cc -o sum.goto *.c --function sum
   goto-instrument --enforce-contract sum sum.goto sum-checking-contracts.goto
   cbmc sum-checking-contracts.goto --function sum
```

The first command just compiles the GOTO program as usual, the second command
instruments the code to check the function satisfies the contract,
and the third one runs CBMC to do the checking.

Now that we have proved that the function satisfies the contract, we can use the function
contract in place of the function implementation wherever the function is
called.

```shell
   goto-cc -o foo.goto *.c --function foo
   goto-instrument --replace-call-with-contract sum foo.goto foo-using-sum-contract.goto
   cbmc foo-using-sum-contract.goto --function foo
```

The first command just compiles the GOTO program as usual, the second command
instruments the code to use the function contract in place of the function
implementation wherever is invoked, and the third one runs CBMC to check the
program using contracts.

## Additional Resources

- [Requires \& Ensures Clauses](contracts-requires-and-ensures.md)
- [Assigns Clause](contracts-assigns.md)
- [Memory Predicates](contracts-memory-predicates.md)
- [History Variables](contracts-history-variables.md)
- [Quantifiers](contracts-quantifiers.md)

Commit message:

CONTRACTS: havoc all statics by default
Now calling nondet_static from enforce_contracts and
apply_loop_contracts.

Reordered some imports to match the new clang-format rules.

doc/cprover-manual/contracts-functions.md, after:

# Function Contracts

CBMC offers support for function contracts, which includes three basic clauses:
_requires_, _ensures_, and _assigns_.
These clauses formally describe the specification of a function.
CBMC also provides a series of built-in constructs to be used with functions
contracts (e.g., _history variables_, _quantifiers_, and _memory predicates_).

When a function contract is checked, the tool automatically havocs all static variables
of the program (to start the analysis in an arbitrary state), in the same way
as using `--nondet-static` would do. If one wishes not to havoc some static variables,
then `--nondet-static-exclude name-of-variable` can be used.
## Overview

Take a look at the example below.

```c
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdint.h>

#define SUCCESS 0
#define FAILURE -1

int sum(const uint32_t a, const uint32_t b, uint32_t* out)
{
  const uint64_t result = ((uint64_t) a) + ((uint64_t) b);
  if (result > UINT32_MAX) return FAILURE;
  *out = (uint32_t) result;
  return SUCCESS;
}

int foo()
{
  uint32_t a;
  uint32_t b;
  uint32_t out;
  int rval = sum(a, b, &out);
  if (rval == SUCCESS)
    return out;
  return rval;
}
```

Function `sum` writes the sum of `a` and `b` to `out`, and returns `SUCCESS`;
unless the result of the addition is too large to be represented as an `uint32_t`, in which case it returns `FAILURE`. Let's write
a function contract for this function.

A function contract has three parts:

- **Precondition** - describes what the function requires of the arguments
  supplied by the caller and of global variables;
- **Postcondition** - describes the effect of the function;
- **Write Set** - describes the set of locations outside the function that
  might be written to.

In our example, the developer may require from the caller to properly allocate
all arguments, thus, pointers must be valid. We can specify the preconditions of
a function using `__CPROVER_requires` (see [Requires \& Ensures
Clauses](contracts-requires-and-ensures.md) Section for details) and we can
specify an allocated object using a predicate called `__CPROVER_is_fresh` (see
[Memory Predicate](contracts-memory-predicates.md) Section for details). Thus, for the `sum` function, the set
of preconditions are

```c
/* Precondition */
__CPROVER_requires(__CPROVER_is_fresh(out, sizeof(*out)))
```

We can use `__CPROVER_ensures` to specify postconditions (see [Requires \&
Ensures Clauses](contracts-requires-and-ensures.md) Section for details).  In our
example, developers can use the built-in construct `__CPROVER_return_value`,
which represents the return value of a function. As postconditions, one may list
possible return values (in this case, either `SUCCESS` or `FAILURE`) as well as
describe the main property of this function: if the function returns `SUCCESS`,
then `*out` stores the result of `a + b`.  We can also check that the value in
`*out` will be preserved in case of failure by using `__CPROVER_old`, which
refers to the value of a given object in the pre-state of a function (see
[History Variables](contracts-history-variables.md) Section for details). Thus, for the `sum` function, the
set of postconditions are


```c
/* Postconditions */
__CPROVER_ensures(__CPROVER_return_value == SUCCESS || __CPROVER_return_value == FAILURE)
__CPROVER_ensures((__CPROVER_return_value == SUCCESS) ==> (*out == (a + b)))
__CPROVER_ensures((__CPROVER_return_value == FAILURE) ==> (*out == __CPROVER_old(*out)))
```

Finally, the _assigns_ clause allows developers to define a frame condition (see
[Assigns Clause](contracts-assigns.md) Section for details).
In general, systems for describing the frame condition of a function
use either writes or modifies semantics; this design is based on the former.
This means that memory not specified by the assigns clause must
not be written within the given function scope, even if the value(s) therein are
not modified. In our example, since we expect that only the value that
`out` points to may be modified, we annotate the function using `__CPROVER_assigns(*out)`.

```c
/* Write Set */
__CPROVER_assigns(*out)
```

Here is the whole function with its contract.

```c
int sum(const uint32_t a, const uint32_t b, uint32_t* out)
/* Precondition */
__CPROVER_requires(__CPROVER_is_fresh(out, sizeof(*out)))
/* Postconditions */
__CPROVER_ensures(__CPROVER_return_value == SUCCESS || __CPROVER_return_value == FAILURE)
__CPROVER_ensures((__CPROVER_return_value == SUCCESS) ==> (*out == (a + b)))
__CPROVER_ensures((__CPROVER_return_value == FAILURE) ==> (*out == __CPROVER_old(*out)))
/* Write Set */
__CPROVER_assigns(*out)
{
  const uint64_t result = ((uint64_t) a) + ((uint64_t) b);
  if (result > UINT32_MAX) return FAILURE;
  *out = (uint32_t) result;
  return SUCCESS;
}
```

First, we have to prove that the function satisfies the contract.

```shell
   goto-cc -o sum.goto *.c --function sum
   goto-instrument --enforce-contract sum sum.goto sum-checking-contracts.goto
   cbmc sum-checking-contracts.goto --function sum
```

The first command just compiles the GOTO program as usual, the second command
instruments the code to check the function satisfies the contract,
and the third one runs CBMC to do the checking.

Now that we have proved that the function satisfies the contract, we can use the function
contract in place of the function implementation wherever the function is
called.

```shell
   goto-cc -o foo.goto *.c --function foo
   goto-instrument --replace-call-with-contract sum foo.goto foo-using-sum-contract.goto
   cbmc foo-using-sum-contract.goto --function foo
```

The first command just compiles the GOTO program as usual, the second command
instruments the code to use the function contract in place of the function
implementation wherever is invoked, and the third one runs CBMC to check the
program using contracts.

## Additional Resources

- [Requires \& Ensures Clauses](contracts-requires-and-ensures.md)
- [Assigns Clause](contracts-assigns.md)
- [Memory Predicates](contracts-memory-predicates.md)
- [History Variables](contracts-history-variables.md)
- [Quantifiers](contracts-quantifiers.md)
