README.md, before:

[![Build Status][codebuild_img]][codebuild]
[![Build Status][codebuild_windows_img]][codebuild_windows]
[![Build Status][coverity_img]][coverity]
[![Build Status][codecov_img]][codecov]

[CProver Documentation](http://cprover.diffblue.com)

About
=====

CBMC is a Bounded Model Checker for C and C++ programs. It supports C89, C99,
most of C11 and most compiler extensions provided by gcc and Visual Studio. It
also supports SystemC using Scoot. It allows verifying array bounds (buffer
overflows), pointer safety, exceptions and user-specified assertions.
Furthermore, it can check C and C++ for consistency with other languages, such
as Verilog. The verification is performed by unwinding the loops in the program
and passing the resulting equation to a decision procedure.

For full information see [cprover.org](http://www.cprover.org/cbmc).

For an overview of the various tools that are part of CProver and
how to use them see [TOOLS_OVERVIEW.md](TOOLS_OVERVIEW.md).


Versions
========

Get the [latest release](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/releases)
* Releases are tested and for production use.

Get the current *develop* version: `git clone https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc.git`
* Develop versions are not recommended for production use.

Installing
==========

### Windows

For windows you can install cbmc binaries via the .msi's found on the
[releases](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/releases) page.

Note that we depend on the Visual C++ redistributables. You likely
already have these, if not please download and run vcredist.x64.exe from
[Microsoft](https://support.microsoft.com/en-gb/help/2977003/the-latest-supported-visual-c-downloads) to install them prior to running
cbmc.

### Linux

For different linux environments, you have these choices:

1. Install CBMC through the distribution's repositories, with the downside
   that this might install an older version of cbmc, depending on what the
   package maintenance policy of the distribution is, or
2. Install CBMC through the `.deb` package built by each release, available
   on the [releases](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/releases) page. To
   do that, download the `.deb` package and run `apt install cbmc-x.y.deb`
   with `root` privileges, with `x.y` being substituted for the version
   you are attempting to install.

   *NOTE*: Because of libc/libc++ ABI compatibility and package
   dependency names, if you follow this path make sure you install the
   package appropriate for the version of operating system you are using.
3. Compile from source using the instructions [here](COMPILING.md)

### macOS

For macOS there is a [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) package
[available](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/cbmc). Once you have installed
Homebrew, simply run

    brew install cbmc

to install cbmc, or if you already have it installed via homebrew

    brew upgrade cbmc

to get an up-to-date version.

Report bugs
===========

If you encounter a problem please file a bug report:
* Create an [issue](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/issues)

Contributing to the code base
=============================

1. Fork the repository
2. Clone the repository `git clone git@github.com:YOURNAME/cbmc.git`
3. Create a branch from the `develop` branch (default branch)
4. Make your changes (follow the [coding guidelines](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/CODING_STANDARD.md))
5. Push your changes to your branch
6. Create a Pull Request targeting the `develop` branch

New contributors can look through the [mini
projects](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/MINI-PROJECTS.md)
page for small, focussed feature ideas.

License
=======
4-clause BSD license, see `LICENSE` file.


[codebuild]: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/codesuite/codebuild/projects/cbmc/history?region=us-east-1
[codebuild_img]: https://codebuild.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/badges?uuid=eyJlbmNyeXB0ZWREYXRhIjoiajhxcmNGUEgyV0xZa2ZFaVd3czJmbm1DdEt3QVdJRVdZaGJuMTUwOHFrZUM3eERwS1g4VEQ3Ymw3bmFncldVQXArajlYL1pXbGZNVTdXdndzUHU4Ly9JPSIsIml2UGFyYW1ldGVyU3BlYyI6IkVUUEdWVEt0SUFONlhyNVAiLCJtYXRlcmlhbFNldFNlcmlhbCI6MX0%3D&branch=develop
[codebuild_windows]: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/codesuite/codebuild/projects/cbmc-windows/history?region=us-east-1
[codebuild_windows_img]: https://codebuild.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/badges?uuid=eyJlbmNyeXB0ZWREYXRhIjoiTFQ4Q0lCSEc1Rk5NcmlzaFZDdU44Vk8zY0c1VCtIVWMwWnJMRitmVFI5bE94Q3dhekVPMWRobFU2Q0xTTlpDSWZUQ3J1eksrWW1rSll1OExXdll2bExZPSIsIml2UGFyYW1ldGVyU3BlYyI6InpqcloyaEdxbjBiQUtvNysiLCJtYXRlcmlhbFNldFNlcmlhbCI6MX0%3D&branch=develop
[coverity]: https://scan.coverity.com/projects/diffblue-cbmc
[coverity_img]: https://scan.coverity.com/projects/13552/badge.svg
[codecov]: https://codecov.io/gh/diffblue/cbmc
[codecov_img]: https://codecov.io/gh/diffblue/cbmc/branch/develop/graphs/badge.svg

Commit message:

Update the README with newer instructions for installing CBMC on macOS

README.md, after:

[![Build Status][codebuild_img]][codebuild]
[![Build Status][codebuild_windows_img]][codebuild_windows]
[![Build Status][coverity_img]][coverity]
[![Build Status][codecov_img]][codecov]

[CProver Documentation](http://cprover.diffblue.com)

About
=====

CBMC is a Bounded Model Checker for C and C++ programs. It supports C89, C99,
most of C11 and most compiler extensions provided by gcc and Visual Studio. It
also supports SystemC using Scoot. It allows verifying array bounds (buffer
overflows), pointer safety, exceptions and user-specified assertions.
Furthermore, it can check C and C++ for consistency with other languages, such
as Verilog. The verification is performed by unwinding the loops in the program
and passing the resulting equation to a decision procedure.

For full information see [cprover.org](http://www.cprover.org/cbmc).

For an overview of the various tools that are part of CProver and
how to use them see [TOOLS_OVERVIEW.md](TOOLS_OVERVIEW.md).


Versions
========

Get the [latest release](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/releases)
* Releases are tested and for production use.

Get the current *develop* version: `git clone https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc.git`
* Develop versions are not recommended for production use.

Installing
==========

### Windows

For windows you can install cbmc binaries via the .msi's found on the
[releases](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/releases) page.

Note that we depend on the Visual C++ redistributables. You likely
already have these, if not please download and run vcredist.x64.exe from
[Microsoft](https://support.microsoft.com/en-gb/help/2977003/the-latest-supported-visual-c-downloads) to install them prior to running
cbmc.

### Linux

For different linux environments, you have these choices:

1. Install CBMC through the distribution's repositories, with the downside
   that this might install an older version of cbmc, depending on what the
   package maintenance policy of the distribution is, or
2. Install CBMC through the `.deb` package built by each release, available
   on the [releases](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/releases) page. To
   do that, download the `.deb` package and run `apt install cbmc-x.y.deb`
   with `root` privileges, with `x.y` being substituted for the version
   you are attempting to install.

   *NOTE*: Because of libc/libc++ ABI compatibility and package
   dependency names, if you follow this path make sure you install the
   package appropriate for the version of operating system you are using.
3. Compile from source using the instructions [here](COMPILING.md)

### macOS

For macOS there is a package available in [Homebrew/core](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/cbmc).
Assuming you have homebrew installed, you can run

```sh
$ brew install cbmc
```

to install CBMC, or if you already have it installed via homebrew

```sh
$ brew upgrade cbmc
```

to get an up-to-date version.

Homebrew will always update formulas to their latest version available, so you may
periodically see an upgraded version of CBMC being downloaded regardless of whether
you explicitly requested that or not. If you would rather this didn't happen, you
can pin the CBMC version with:

```sh
$ brew pin cbmc
```

If instead of the latest version, you would want to install a historic version, you
can do so with a [homebrew tap](https://github.com/diffblue/homebrew-cbmc) that we
maintain. Instructions for that are available in the [documentation](doc/ADR/homebrew_tap.md)

Report bugs
===========

If you encounter a problem please file a bug report:
* Create an [issue](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/issues)

Contributing to the code base
=============================

1. Fork the repository
2. Clone the repository `git clone git@github.com:YOURNAME/cbmc.git`
3. Create a branch from the `develop` branch (default branch)
4. Make your changes (follow the [coding guidelines](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/CODING_STANDARD.md))
5. Push your changes to your branch
6. Create a Pull Request targeting the `develop` branch

New contributors can look through the [mini
projects](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/MINI-PROJECTS.md)
page for small, focussed feature ideas.

License
=======
4-clause BSD license, see `LICENSE` file.


[codebuild]: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/codesuite/codebuild/projects/cbmc/history?region=us-east-1
[codebuild_img]: https://codebuild.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/badges?uuid=eyJlbmNyeXB0ZWREYXRhIjoiajhxcmNGUEgyV0xZa2ZFaVd3czJmbm1DdEt3QVdJRVdZaGJuMTUwOHFrZUM3eERwS1g4VEQ3Ymw3bmFncldVQXArajlYL1pXbGZNVTdXdndzUHU4Ly9JPSIsIml2UGFyYW1ldGVyU3BlYyI6IkVUUEdWVEt0SUFONlhyNVAiLCJtYXRlcmlhbFNldFNlcmlhbCI6MX0%3D&branch=develop
[codebuild_windows]: https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/codesuite/codebuild/projects/cbmc-windows/history?region=us-east-1
[codebuild_windows_img]: https://codebuild.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/badges?uuid=eyJlbmNyeXB0ZWREYXRhIjoiTFQ4Q0lCSEc1Rk5NcmlzaFZDdU44Vk8zY0c1VCtIVWMwWnJMRitmVFI5bE94Q3dhekVPMWRobFU2Q0xTTlpDSWZUQ3J1eksrWW1rSll1OExXdll2bExZPSIsIml2UGFyYW1ldGVyU3BlYyI6InpqcloyaEdxbjBiQUtvNysiLCJtYXRlcmlhbFNldFNlcmlhbCI6MX0%3D&branch=develop
[coverity]: https://scan.coverity.com/projects/diffblue-cbmc
[coverity_img]: https://scan.coverity.com/projects/13552/badge.svg
[codecov]: https://codecov.io/gh/diffblue/cbmc
[codecov_img]: https://codecov.io/gh/diffblue/cbmc/branch/develop/graphs/badge.svg
