doc/architectural/compilation-and-development.md, before:

\ingroup module_hidden 
\page compilation-and-development Compilation and Development

\author Martin Brain, Peter Schrammel, Owen Jones

\section compilation-and-development-section-compilation Compilation

The CBMC source code is available on
[its GitHub page](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc).


\subsection compilation-and-development-subsection-makefiles Makefiles

Instructions for compiling CBMC using makefiles are
available in
[COMPILING.md](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/COMPILING.md#what-architecture)
in the root of the CBMC repository. They cover Linux, Solaris 11,
FreeBSD 11, MacOS X and Windows.


\subsection compilation-and-development-subsection-cmake-files CMake files

There is also support for compiling using CMake. Instructions are
available in
[COMPILING.md](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/COMPILING.md#working-with-cmake)
in the root of the CBMC repository.


\subsection compilation-and-development-subsection-personal-configuration Personal configuration

\subsubsection compilation-and-development-subsubsection-config-inc config.inc

Two files,
[config.inc](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/src/config.inc) and
[common](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/src/common), are
included in every makefile. 
[config.inc](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/src/config.inc)
contains configuration options
relating to compilation so that they can be conveniently edited in one place.
[common](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/src/common)
contains commands that are needed in every makefile but which the
developer is not expected to edit. (There is also
[another config.inc](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/jbmc/src/config.inc)
which is also included in every makefile in the `jbmc` folder.)

Note, these files are not involved in the CMake build.
 

\subsubsection compilation-and-development-subsubsection-macro-debug Macro DEBUG

If the macro `DEBUG` is defined during compilation of CBMC (for example by
using a compiler flag) then extra debug code will be included. This includes
print statements and code checking that data structures are as expected.


\section compilation-and-development-section-running-tests Running tests

\subsection compilation-and-development-subsection-regression-tests Regression tests

The regression tests are contained in `regression/` and `jbmc/regression/`.
Inside these folders there is a directory for each of the modules. Each
of these contains multiple test directories, with names describing
what they test. When there are multiple tests in a test directory then
they should all test very similar aspects of the program's behaviour. Each
test directory contains input files and one or more test description files,
which have the ending `.desc`. The test description files specify what command
to run, what output is expected and so on. The test framework is a
Perl script,
[test.pl](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/regression/test.pl),
located in `regression/test.pl`.

The `--help` option to `test.pl` outlines the
format of the test description files. Most importantly, the first word in a
test description file is its level, which is one of: `CORE` (should be run in
CI, should succeed), `THOROUGH` (takes too long to be run in CI, should
succeed), `FUTURE` (will succeed when a planned feature is added) or
`KNOWNBUG` (will succeed when a bug is fixed).

\subsubsection compilation-and-development-subsubsection-running-regression-tests-with-make Running regression tests with `make`

If you have compiled using `make` then you can run the regression tests
using `make test`. Run it from `regression/` to run all the regression tests,
or any of its subfolders to just run the tests for that module. The number
of tests that are run in parallel can be controlled through the environment
variable `TESTPL_JOBS`.

If you have not compiled using `make` then this won't work, because the
makefile is expecting to find binaries like `cbmc` and `jbmc` in the source
folders.

\subsubsection compilation-and-development-subsubsection-running-regression-tests-with-ctest Running regression tests with `ctest`

If you have compiled using CMake then you can run the regression tests (and
the unit tests) using CTest.

Here are two example commands, to be run from the `build/` directory:

    ctest -V -L CORE -R cpp
    ctest -V -L CORE -R cpp -E cbmc-cpp

`-V` makes it print out more
useful output. `-L CORE` makes it only run tests that have been tagged
`CORE`. `-R regular_expression` can be used to limit which tests are run to
those which match the given regular expression, and `-E regex` excludes tests
to those which match the given regular expression.
So the first command will run all the CORE tests in `regression/cbmc/cpp` and
`regression/cbmc/cbmc-cpp`, and the second will run all the CORE tests in
`regression/cbmc/cpp` only. Another useful option is `-N`, which makes CTest
list which tests it will run without actually running them.


\subsubsection compilation-and-development-subsubsection-running-regression-tests-directly-with-test-pl Running regression tests directly with `test.pl`

It can be useful to run a single test folder in isolation. This can be done by
running `regression/test.pl` directly. The way that `test.pl` is run varies between the
different modules, and can be ascertained by looking at the `test` target in
the makefile. The simple case is when there isn't a file called `chain.sh`.
Then you can directly run `test.pl` on a single test folder with the
following command (from the module directory):

    <absolute-path-to-test.pl> -p -c <absolute-path-to-binary> <test-folder>

`-p` makes it print a log of failed tests and `-c` tells it where to find the
binary to run, e.g. `cbmc`, `jbmc` or `goto-analyzer`
(the path does not have to be absolute, but it is recommended).
If `<test-folder>` is not provided then all test directories are run. The
`--help` option lists all command line options, including `-j` for running
multiple tests in parallel and `-C`, `-T`, `-F` and `-K` for controlling
whether `CORE`, `THOROUGH`, `FUTURE` or `KNOWNBUG` tests are run.

When there is a file called `chain.sh` then `test.pl` is called with
`-c ../chain.sh`, followed by arguments which vary from module to module.


\subsection compilation-and-development-subsection-unit-tests Unit tests

The unit tests are contained in the `unit/` folder. They are written using the
[Catch](https://github.com/philsquared/Catch) unit test framework.

To run the unit tests for CBMC, go to `unit/` and run

    ../<build-folder>/bin/unit

To run the unit tests for JBMC, go to `jbmc/unit/` and run

    ../../<build-folder>/bin/java-unit

The unit tests are also included in CTest as `unit` and `java-unit`.

Note that some tests run which are expected to fail - see the summary at
the end of the run to see how many tests passed, how many failed which were
expected to and how many tests failed which were not expected to.

For more information on the structure of `unit/` and how to tag tests, see
[the section on unit tests in `CODING_STANDARD.md` in the root of the CBMC
repository](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/CODING_STANDARD.md#unit-tests)


\subsection compilation-and-development-subsection-sat-solver Using a different SAT solver

By default, CBMC will assume MiniSat 2 as the SAT back-end. Several other
solvers are supported (see also
[config.inc](compilation-and-development-subsubsection-config-inc) above). As a
more general option, which is not limited to a single SAT solver, you may use
the IPASIR interface. For example, to use the SAT solver RISS, proceed as
follows:

1) Build RISS (in particular its IPASIR configuration):

    git clone https://github.com/conp-solutions/riss riss.git
    cd riss.git
    mkdir build
    cd build
    cmake ..
    make riss-coprocessor-lib-static
    cd ../..

2) Build CBMC while enabling the IPASIR back-end:
    make -C src IPASIR=../../riss.git/riss \
      LIBS="../../riss.git/build/lib/libriss-coprocessor.a -lpthread"

3) Run CBMC - note that RISS is highly configurable via the RISSCONFIG
environment variable:
    export RISSCONFIG=VERBOSE:BMC1
    ... run CBMC ...


\section compilation-and-development-section-documentation Documentation

Apart from the (user-orientated) CBMC user manual and this document, most
of the rest of the documentation is inline in the code as `doxygen` and
some comments. A man page for CBMC, goto-cc and goto-instrument is
contained in the `doc/` directory and gives some options for these
tools. All of these could be improved and patches are very welcome. In
some cases the algorithms used are described in the relevant papers.

The doxygen documentation can be [accessed online](http://cprover.diffblue.com).
To build it locally, run `scripts/run_doxygen.sh`.  HTML output will be created
in `doc/html/`. The index page is `doc/html/index.html`.  This script will
filter out expected warning messages from doxygen, so that new problems are more
obvious.  It is important to use the correct version of doxygen, as specified
in `run_doxygen.sh`, so that there are no unexpected changes to the list of
expected warnings.  In the event that any change fixes an old warning, then the 
corresponding line(s) should be deleted from
`scripts/expected_doxygen_warnings.txt`.  We want to avoid adding any more
warnings to this list of expected warnings, but that can be done to work around
limitations in Doxygen (where the code and documentation are completely correct).


\section compilation-and-development-section-formatting Formatting

The <a
href="https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/CODING_STANDARD.md">
`CODING_STANDARD.md`</a> file in the root of the CBMC repository contains
guidance on how to write code for the CBMC repository. This includes
which language features can be used and formatting rules.

C++ code can be automatically reformatted in the correct way by running
`clang-format`. There are more details in
[CODING_STANDARD.md](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/CODING_STANDARD.md#using-clang-format).


\section compilation-and-development-section-linting Linting

There is also a linting script, `scripts/cpplint.py`. There is a wrapper
script to run `cpplint.py` only on lines that differ from another
branch, e.g. to run it on lines that have been changed from `develop`:

    scripts/run_lint.sh develop

There are also instructions for adding this as a git pre-commit hook in
[CODING_STANDARD.md](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/CODING_STANDARD.md#pre-commit-hook-to-run-cpplint-locally).

Commit message:

Move guidance about absolute paths

doc/architectural/compilation-and-development.md, after:

\ingroup module_hidden 
\page compilation-and-development Compilation and Development

\author Martin Brain, Peter Schrammel, Owen Jones

\section compilation-and-development-section-compilation Compilation

The CBMC source code is available on
[its GitHub page](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc).


\subsection compilation-and-development-subsection-makefiles Makefiles

Instructions for compiling CBMC using makefiles are
available in
[COMPILING.md](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/COMPILING.md#what-architecture)
in the root of the CBMC repository. They cover Linux, Solaris 11,
FreeBSD 11, MacOS X and Windows.


\subsection compilation-and-development-subsection-cmake-files CMake files

There is also support for compiling using CMake. Instructions are
available in
[COMPILING.md](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/COMPILING.md#working-with-cmake)
in the root of the CBMC repository.


\subsection compilation-and-development-subsection-personal-configuration Personal configuration

\subsubsection compilation-and-development-subsubsection-config-inc config.inc

Two files,
[config.inc](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/src/config.inc) and
[common](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/src/common), are
included in every makefile. 
[config.inc](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/src/config.inc)
contains configuration options
relating to compilation so that they can be conveniently edited in one place.
[common](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/src/common)
contains commands that are needed in every makefile but which the
developer is not expected to edit. (There is also
[another config.inc](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/jbmc/src/config.inc)
which is also included in every makefile in the `jbmc` folder.)

Note, these files are not involved in the CMake build.
 

\subsubsection compilation-and-development-subsubsection-macro-debug Macro DEBUG

If the macro `DEBUG` is defined during compilation of CBMC (for example by
using a compiler flag) then extra debug code will be included. This includes
print statements and code checking that data structures are as expected.


\section compilation-and-development-section-running-tests Running tests

\subsection compilation-and-development-subsection-regression-tests Regression tests

The regression tests are contained in `regression/` and `jbmc/regression/`.
Inside these folders there is a directory for each of the modules. Each
of these contains multiple test directories, with names describing
what they test. When there are multiple tests in a test directory then
they should all test very similar aspects of the program's behaviour. Each
test directory contains input files and one or more test description files,
which have the ending `.desc`. The test description files specify what command
to run, what output is expected and so on. The test framework is a
Perl script,
[test.pl](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/regression/test.pl),
located in `regression/test.pl`.

The `--help` option to `test.pl` outlines the
format of the test description files. Most importantly, the first word in a
test description file is its level, which is one of: `CORE` (should be run in
CI, should succeed), `THOROUGH` (takes too long to be run in CI, should
succeed), `FUTURE` (will succeed when a planned feature is added) or
`KNOWNBUG` (will succeed when a bug is fixed).

\subsubsection compilation-and-development-subsubsection-running-regression-tests-with-make Running regression tests with `make`

If you have compiled using `make` then you can run the regression tests
using `make test`. Run it from `regression/` to run all the regression tests,
or any of its subfolders to just run the tests for that module. The number
of tests that are run in parallel can be controlled through the environment
variable `TESTPL_JOBS`.

If you have not compiled using `make` then this won't work, because the
makefile is expecting to find binaries like `cbmc` and `jbmc` in the source
folders.

\subsubsection compilation-and-development-subsubsection-running-regression-tests-with-ctest Running regression tests with `ctest`

If you have compiled using CMake then you can run the regression tests (and
the unit tests) using CTest.

Here are two example commands, to be run from the `build/` directory:

    ctest -V -L CORE -R cpp
    ctest -V -L CORE -R cpp -E cbmc-cpp

`-V` makes it print out more
useful output. `-L CORE` makes it only run tests that have been tagged
`CORE`. `-R regular_expression` can be used to limit which tests are run to
those which match the given regular expression, and `-E regex` excludes tests
to those which match the given regular expression.
So the first command will run all the CORE tests in `regression/cbmc/cpp` and
`regression/cbmc/cbmc-cpp`, and the second will run all the CORE tests in
`regression/cbmc/cpp` only. Another useful option is `-N`, which makes CTest
list which tests it will run without actually running them.


\subsubsection compilation-and-development-subsubsection-running-regression-tests-directly-with-test-pl Running regression tests directly with `test.pl`

It can be useful to run a single test folder in isolation. This can be done by
running `regression/test.pl` directly. The way that `test.pl` is run varies between the
different modules, and can be ascertained by looking at the `test` target in
the makefile. The simple case is when there isn't a file called `chain.sh`.
Then you can directly run `test.pl` on a single test folder with the
following command from the module directory (note that it is recommended to
use absolute paths as it avoids many issues):

    <absolute-path-to-test.pl> -p -c <absolute-path-to-binary> <test-folder>

`-p` makes it print a log of failed tests and `-c` tells it where to find the
binary to run, e.g. `cbmc`, `jbmc` or `goto-analyzer`.
If `<test-folder>` is not provided then all test directories are run. The
`--help` option lists all command line options, including `-j` for running
multiple tests in parallel and `-C`, `-T`, `-F` and `-K` for controlling
whether `CORE`, `THOROUGH`, `FUTURE` or `KNOWNBUG` tests are run.

When there is a file called `chain.sh` then `test.pl` is called with
`-c ../chain.sh`, followed by arguments which vary from module to module.


\subsection compilation-and-development-subsection-unit-tests Unit tests

The unit tests are contained in the `unit/` folder. They are written using the
[Catch](https://github.com/philsquared/Catch) unit test framework.

To run the unit tests for CBMC, go to `unit/` and run

    ../<build-folder>/bin/unit

To run the unit tests for JBMC, go to `jbmc/unit/` and run

    ../../<build-folder>/bin/java-unit

The unit tests are also included in CTest as `unit` and `java-unit`.

Note that some tests run which are expected to fail - see the summary at
the end of the run to see how many tests passed, how many failed which were
expected to and how many tests failed which were not expected to.

For more information on the structure of `unit/` and how to tag tests, see
[the section on unit tests in `CODING_STANDARD.md` in the root of the CBMC
repository](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/CODING_STANDARD.md#unit-tests)


\subsection compilation-and-development-subsection-sat-solver Using a different SAT solver

By default, CBMC will assume MiniSat 2 as the SAT back-end. Several other
solvers are supported (see also
[config.inc](compilation-and-development-subsubsection-config-inc) above). As a
more general option, which is not limited to a single SAT solver, you may use
the IPASIR interface. For example, to use the SAT solver RISS, proceed as
follows:

1) Build RISS (in particular its IPASIR configuration):

    git clone https://github.com/conp-solutions/riss riss.git
    cd riss.git
    mkdir build
    cd build
    cmake ..
    make riss-coprocessor-lib-static
    cd ../..

2) Build CBMC while enabling the IPASIR back-end:
    make -C src IPASIR=../../riss.git/riss \
      LIBS="../../riss.git/build/lib/libriss-coprocessor.a -lpthread"

3) Run CBMC - note that RISS is highly configurable via the RISSCONFIG
environment variable:
    export RISSCONFIG=VERBOSE:BMC1
    ... run CBMC ...


\section compilation-and-development-section-documentation Documentation

Apart from the (user-orientated) CBMC user manual and this document, most
of the rest of the documentation is inline in the code as `doxygen` and
some comments. A man page for CBMC, goto-cc and goto-instrument is
contained in the `doc/` directory and gives some options for these
tools. All of these could be improved and patches are very welcome. In
some cases the algorithms used are described in the relevant papers.

The doxygen documentation can be [accessed online](http://cprover.diffblue.com).
To build it locally, run `scripts/run_doxygen.sh`.  HTML output will be created
in `doc/html/`. The index page is `doc/html/index.html`.  This script will
filter out expected warning messages from doxygen, so that new problems are more
obvious.  It is important to use the correct version of doxygen, as specified
in `run_doxygen.sh`, so that there are no unexpected changes to the list of
expected warnings.  In the event that any change fixes an old warning, then the 
corresponding line(s) should be deleted from
`scripts/expected_doxygen_warnings.txt`.  We want to avoid adding any more
warnings to this list of expected warnings, but that can be done to work around
limitations in Doxygen (where the code and documentation are completely correct).


\section compilation-and-development-section-formatting Formatting

The <a
href="https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/CODING_STANDARD.md">
`CODING_STANDARD.md`</a> file in the root of the CBMC repository contains
guidance on how to write code for the CBMC repository. This includes
which language features can be used and formatting rules.

C++ code can be automatically reformatted in the correct way by running
`clang-format`. There are more details in
[CODING_STANDARD.md](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/CODING_STANDARD.md#using-clang-format).


\section compilation-and-development-section-linting Linting

There is also a linting script, `scripts/cpplint.py`. There is a wrapper
script to run `cpplint.py` only on lines that differ from another
branch, e.g. to run it on lines that have been changed from `develop`:

    scripts/run_lint.sh develop

There are also instructions for adding this as a git pre-commit hook in
[CODING_STANDARD.md](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/blob/develop/CODING_STANDARD.md#pre-commit-hook-to-run-cpplint-locally).
