src/analyses/README.md, before:

\ingroup module_hidden
\defgroup analyses analyses

# Folder analyses

This contains the abstract interpretation framework `ai.h` and several
static analyses that instantiate it.

\section analyses-frameworks Frameworks:

\subsection analyses-ait Abstract interpreter framework (ait)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-static-analysist Old Abstract interpreter framework (static_analysist)

This is obsolete.

\subsection analyses-flow-insensitive-analysis Flow-insensitive analysis (flow_insensitive_analysist)

Framework for flow-insensitive analyses. Maintains a single global abstract
value which instructions are invited to transform in turn. Unsound (terminates
too early) if
(a) there are two or more instructions that incrementally reach a fixed point,
for example by walking a chain of pointers and updating a points-to set, but
(b) those instructions are separated by instructions that don't update the
abstract value (for example, SKIP instructions). Therefore, not recommended for
new code.

Only current user in-tree is \ref value_set_analysis_fit and its close
relatives, \ref value_set_analysis_fivrt and \ref value_set_analysis_fivrnst

\section analyses-specific-analyses Specific analyses:

\subsection analyses-call-graph Call graph and associated helpers (call_grapht)

A [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Call_graph](call graph) for a GOTO model or
GOTO functions collection. \ref call_grapht implements a basic call graph, but
can also export the graph in \ref grapht format, which permits more advanced
graph algorithms to be applied; see \ref call_graph_helpers.h for functions
that work with the \ref grapht representation.

\subsection analyses-dominator Dominator analysis (cfg_dominators_templatet)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-constant-propagation Constant propagation (\ref constant_propagator_ait)

A simple, unsound constant propagator. Replaces RHS symbol expressions (variable
reads) with their values when they appear to have a unique value at a particular
program point. Unsound with respect to pointer operations on the left-hand side
of assignments.

\subsection analyses-taint Taint analysis (custom_bitvector_analysist)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-dependence-graph Data- and control-dependence analysis (dependence_grapht)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-dirtyt Address-taken lvalue analysis (dirtyt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-const-cast-removal const_cast removal analysis (does_remove_constt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-escape Escape analysis (escape_analysist)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-global-may-alias Global may-alias analysis (global_may_aliast)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-rwt Read-write range analysis (goto_rwt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-invariant-propagation Invariant propagation (invariant_propagationt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-is-threaded Multithreaded program detection (is_threadedt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-pointer-classification Pointer classification analysis (is-heap-pointer, might-be-null, etc -- local_bitvector_analysist)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-cfg Control-flow graph (local_cfgt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-local-may-alias Local may-alias analysis (local_may_aliast)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-safe-dereference Safe dereference analysis (local_safe_pointerst)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-locals Address-taken locals analysis (localst)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-natural-loop Natural loop analysis (natural_loops_templatet)

A natural loop is when the nodes and edges of a graph make one self-encapsulating
circle (implemented in /ref natural_loops_templatet) with no incoming edges from external nodes.
For example A -> B -> C -> D -> A is a natural loop, but if B has an incoming edge from X,
then it isn't a natural loop, because X is an external node. Outgoing edges don't affect
the natural-ness of a loop.

/ref cfg_dominators_templatet provides the dominator analysis used to determine if a nodes
children can only be reached through itself and is thus part of a natural loop, and whose specifics
is covered in a separate subsection.

A basic description for how a natural loop works is here: https://web.cs.wpi.edu/~kal/PLT/PLT8.6.4.html

\subsection analyses-reaching-definitions Reaching definitions (reaching_definitions_analysist)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-uncaught-exceptions Uncaught exceptions analysis (uncaught_exceptions_domaint)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-uninitialized-locals Uninitialized locals analysis (uninitialized_analysist)

To be documented.

\section analyses-transformations Transformations (arguably in the wrong directory):

\subsection analyses-goto-checkt Pointer / overflow / other check insertion (goto_checkt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-interval-analysis Integer interval analysis -- both an analysis and a transformation

\ref interval_analysis interprets instructions of the input \ref goto_modelt
over the \ref interval_domaint, evaluates variables for each program location
(as intervals) and instruments the program with assumptions representing the
over-approximation of variable values.

Commit message:

Add documentation for global-may-alias analysis.
Document global-may-alias pointer analysis,
and add some information in the analyses/readme
file about the kind of analysis it performs.

src/analyses/README.md, after:

\ingroup module_hidden
\defgroup analyses analyses

# Folder analyses

This contains the abstract interpretation framework `ai.h` and several
static analyses that instantiate it.

\section analyses-frameworks Frameworks:

\subsection analyses-ait Abstract interpreter framework (ait)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-static-analysist Old Abstract interpreter framework (static_analysist)

This is obsolete.

\subsection analyses-flow-insensitive-analysis Flow-insensitive analysis (flow_insensitive_analysist)

Framework for flow-insensitive analyses. Maintains a single global abstract
value which instructions are invited to transform in turn. Unsound (terminates
too early) if
(a) there are two or more instructions that incrementally reach a fixed point,
for example by walking a chain of pointers and updating a points-to set, but
(b) those instructions are separated by instructions that don't update the
abstract value (for example, SKIP instructions). Therefore, not recommended for
new code.

Only current user in-tree is \ref value_set_analysis_fit and its close
relatives, \ref value_set_analysis_fivrt and \ref value_set_analysis_fivrnst

\section analyses-specific-analyses Specific analyses:

\subsection analyses-call-graph Call graph and associated helpers (call_grapht)

A [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Call_graph](call graph) for a GOTO model or
GOTO functions collection. \ref call_grapht implements a basic call graph, but
can also export the graph in \ref grapht format, which permits more advanced
graph algorithms to be applied; see \ref call_graph_helpers.h for functions
that work with the \ref grapht representation.

\subsection analyses-dominator Dominator analysis (cfg_dominators_templatet)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-constant-propagation Constant propagation (\ref constant_propagator_ait)

A simple, unsound constant propagator. Replaces RHS symbol expressions (variable
reads) with their values when they appear to have a unique value at a particular
program point. Unsound with respect to pointer operations on the left-hand side
of assignments.

\subsection analyses-taint Taint analysis (custom_bitvector_analysist)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-dependence-graph Data- and control-dependence analysis (dependence_grapht)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-dirtyt Address-taken lvalue analysis (dirtyt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-const-cast-removal const_cast removal analysis (does_remove_constt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-escape Escape analysis (escape_analysist)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-global-may-alias Global may-alias analysis (global_may_aliast)

This is a pointer alias analysis (analysing the memory locations a pointer
expression may point to, and finding when two pointer expressions refer to 
the same storage locations). It is flow-insensitive, meaning that it computes
what memory locations pointer expressions may refer to at any time during the program
execution. It's called may-alias, because it looks for aliasing that may occur
during program execution (compared to analysis for aliasing that must occur). It's
an over-approximating analysis.

\subsection analyses-rwt Read-write range analysis (goto_rwt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-invariant-propagation Invariant propagation (invariant_propagationt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-is-threaded Multithreaded program detection (is_threadedt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-pointer-classification Pointer classification analysis (is-heap-pointer, might-be-null, etc -- local_bitvector_analysist)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-cfg Control-flow graph (local_cfgt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-local-may-alias Local may-alias analysis (local_may_aliast)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-safe-dereference Safe dereference analysis (local_safe_pointerst)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-locals Address-taken locals analysis (localst)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-natural-loop Natural loop analysis (natural_loops_templatet)

A natural loop is when the nodes and edges of a graph make one self-encapsulating
circle (implemented in /ref natural_loops_templatet) with no incoming edges from external nodes.
For example A -> B -> C -> D -> A is a natural loop, but if B has an incoming edge from X,
then it isn't a natural loop, because X is an external node. Outgoing edges don't affect
the natural-ness of a loop.

/ref cfg_dominators_templatet provides the dominator analysis used to determine if a nodes
children can only be reached through itself and is thus part of a natural loop, and whose specifics
is covered in a separate subsection.

A basic description for how a natural loop works is here: https://web.cs.wpi.edu/~kal/PLT/PLT8.6.4.html

\subsection analyses-reaching-definitions Reaching definitions (reaching_definitions_analysist)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-uncaught-exceptions Uncaught exceptions analysis (uncaught_exceptions_domaint)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-uninitialized-locals Uninitialized locals analysis (uninitialized_analysist)

To be documented.

\section analyses-transformations Transformations (arguably in the wrong directory):

\subsection analyses-goto-checkt Pointer / overflow / other check insertion (goto_checkt)

To be documented.

\subsection analyses-interval-analysis Integer interval analysis -- both an analysis and a transformation

\ref interval_analysis interprets instructions of the input \ref goto_modelt
over the \ref interval_domaint, evaluates variables for each program location
(as intervals) and instruments the program with assumptions representing the
over-approximation of variable values.
